# Strong Towns Street Design Guidelines and Principles

## Introduction

The intention of this repository is to act as an example of applying Strong
Towns thinking to the design, construction, and maintenance of a municipal
street system. There are a few important items to note. First and foremost, this
guide is principally concerned with _streets_ as opposed to _roads_. If you are
unaware of the difference between the two please refer to [this blog
post](https://www.strongtowns.org/journal/2013/3/4/the-stroad.html).

Furthermore, it is important to understand the concept of incrementalism. That
is, our cities are strongest when they develop as a series of small changes
carried out by individuals and small groups. The scale at which municipal
investments are made today (everything built to high standards and in a finished
state), coupled with the large scale at which real estate development operates,
has created a fragile system that is highly dependent on debt and is prone to
serious disruption from external shocks. These problems were exposed during the
financial crisis of the late 2000s and the vast majority of communities have
done little to correct the root cause.

By contrast, a Strong Town seeks ways to eliminate downside risk in its
infrastructure by making small improvements and continually seeking to cultivate
community wealth through public investment. It also rejects the notion that any
place is _finished_. As Jane Jacobs observed decades ago, change and continual
revitalization are a prerequisite for a healthy community.

Lastly, one of the primary concerns of Strong Towns is ensuring the financial
health and viability of our cities. These guidelines are an attempt to recognize
that the materials and maintenance regime associated with a given street should
be commensurate with the wealth generated by it in the form of the real estate
development it enables. For example, a subdivision of large-lot single family
homes is an inherently less efficient user of public resources than a
neighborhood of townhomes. These guidelines recognize that the public resources
dedicated to the former should be less than the latter. This is not a moral
judgment; it is a financial one.

## Development Typologies

Typical street design guidelines and maintenance practices are not inherently
responsive to the context of the real estate investment they enable. For
example, your city's street design guidelines likely specify that all public
roads are to be paved with asphalt or concrete from day 1.

These guidelines are divided into development typologies. The goal is to ensure
that public investments in street infrastructure reflect the value created by
those investments. A low value development should not receive the same level of
investment as a development that adds significant wealth to the community.

This document features design guidelines for the following development
typologies, which are described in more detail further on:

* Rural and large-lot residential
* Single family homes and duplexes
* Missing middle
* Urban mid- and high-rise


## Street Classes

Most cities use a classification system to establish a hierarchy of streets.
Engineers and planners refer to this as _functional classification_. The
traditional functional classification scheme separates streets into three major
groups, listed in order of importance:  

* Arterials
* Collectors
* Locals

Many communities further subdivide these categories.

Note that these classifications are designed to emphasize the hierarchy related
to motor vehicle traffic. Thus, an arterial street is designed to carry a large
volume of motor vehicles. To the extent people walking or wheeling are also
accommodated by this street, it is a happy byproduct of a design that is first
and foremost concerned with moving cars, not a primary concern.

A Strong Town recognizes that motor vehicles can be a useful tool. However, it
knows that car-centric street design results in expensive infrastructure that is
poorly adapted to complex urban environments. It also degrades the value of
surrounding real estate, undermining the very purpose for which a street exists.

This guide establishes standards for three types of street, which are described
in more detail in subsequent sections:

* Connectors
* Thru-ways
* Boulevards
